# GitGitGadget <img alt="logo" width="128px" align="right" src="images/gitgitgadget.png">

## Goal

GitGitGadget is intended to help with the code contribution process of the Git
project itself.

### Background

Git's code contribution process follows the example of the Linux development
(that is also used in other projects such as Cygwin, BusyBox etc): centered
around one mailing list ([git@vger.kernel.org](mailto:git@vger.kernel.org)),
everything is discussed in one place (except security bugs, which are handled at
[git-security@googlegroups.com](mailto:git-security@googlegroups.com), i.e. yet
another mailing list):

- bug reports,
- request for help,
- questions about design decisions,
- feature requests,
- mentoring new contributors, and
- patch submissions.

That's right: Git's development uses Git on the contributors' side and on the
maintainer side, yet the code is transferred via mail between contributors and
the maintainer. Most notably, there is no codified review process other than the
free-form discussion via mails, and the convenience of Pull Requests and
web-based code review is completely missing.

As a consequence, code submissions are therefore frequently reviewed purely
based on the patches, without taking any context into account other than what
was provided in the mail sent by the submitter.

Another consequence is that contributors often miss that they are expected to
respond or work more on their submitted patches, as the current status of any
given patch series is described only in one of the bi-weekly "What's cooking"
mails sent by the Git maintainer, which contain not only information about one,
but about all active patch submissions.

Yet another consequence of requiring contributors to send patches as verbatim,
inlined diffs in mails, and to respond with answers interjected in the quoted
mails (as opposed to, say, top-posting), is that most developers are deterred
enough from contributing fixes that they simply don't (the requirements are in
direct opposition of what both the most popular desktop mail client, Outlook,
and the most popular web-based mail client, GMail, offer).

## GitGitGadget's mission

The idea is to allow developers to contribute patches and interact with the
reviewers by using a very familiar interface: GitHub Pull Requests.

GitGitGadget's job is to send the patches to the Git mailing list in the correct
format.

Hopefully, future versions of GitGitGadget will add more convenience to the dialog.

## Design notes

### Historical context

GitGitGadget was originally modeled after the workflow of one single Git
contributor, Johannes Schindelin, who automated the patch contribution process
via [a shell script](https://github.com/dscho/mail-patch-series).

This process was still too manual, and too limited to one contributor's needs,
and still needed too much manual work to serve as the base for any other
developer's needs.

To remedy this, the shell script was first converted into a node.js script, and
then into a Typescript project with the intention to turn this into a hybrid web
application performing its interaction with contributors via GitHub based on the
[Probot](https://probot.github.io) framework and performing its background
maintenance tasks in the form of [Azure
Pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/index). When
the web application design became too limiting, it was converted into an [Azure
Function](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/functions/) that backs the
GitHub App and triggers an Azure Pipeline when given specific commands.

### Typescript

A convenient way to implement a UI based on GitHub Pull Requests is to create
a GitHub App that triggers an Azure Function that is implemented in Javascript.

The backend is implemented as an Azure Pipeline, using Typescript to allow for
type-safe and convenient development, and [Visual Studio
Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) is a natural fit to develop both the
Pipeline and the Function.

While many developers may not be familiar with Typescript, it is similar enough
to (and a superset of) Javascript, which is a really well-known language. This
is important, to lower the bar of entry for anybody who finds GitGitGadget
lacking a feature: they can easily implement that feature without having to
learn a completely new language first.

Besides, the node.js ecosystem provides a rich set of support libraries, ready
to use at one's fingertips.

### Main UI

The principal way to interact with GitGitGadget is by opening a Pull Request at
<https://github.com/gitgitgadget/git>. The patch submission is then triggered by
a command given in a single comment to that PR. GitGitGadget will follow up with
a comment describing details of the patch submission, such as the link to the
cover letter in [Git's mailing list archive](https://lore.kernel.org/git).

Any other interesting information that can be inferred automatically will be
added in the form of further comments to the same Pull Request.

The idea is to implement this user interface as a web app on Azure, backed by
the repository <https://github.com/gitgitgadget/gitgitgadget> and deployed
automatically.

### Background tasks

The repositories <https://github.com/gitster/git> (and
<https://lore.kernel.org/git)>) are monitored via dedicated [Azure
Pipelines](https://dev.azure.com/gitgitgadget/git/_build?definitionId=3),
backed by Typescript code in <https://github.com/gitgitgadget/gitgitgadget>.

### Patch submissions

The patches will be submitted in the required form, as mails to the Git mailing
list. The description of the Pull Request will be used as cover letter, after
extracting `Cc:` lines from the footer (if any).

The mails will be sent via the dedicated account gitgitgadget@gmail.com, with
`From: "<author> via GitGitGadget" <gitgitgadget@gmail.com>` headers, and
linking to the corresponding PR/commits on GitHub.

### Storage

GitGitGadget stores its metadata in the form of Git notes, in
`refs/notes/gitgitgadget` in <https://github.com/gitgitgadget/git>.

Note: GitGitGadget uses Git notes, not only to keep a record, and to make
debugging easier, but also to be able to fix bugs manually when necessary.

We follow the original idea as `refs/notes/amlog` in
<https://github.com/git/git> (which inspired this design): first, we add the
Message-Id as a blob, then annotate that with a JSON structure (stable: sorted
by key name) that contains metadata about that mail.

Metadata includes (but is not limited to): the original commit
(`Submitted-as:`), the commit in <https://github.com/git/git>
(`Integrated-as:`), the Pull Request in <https://github.com/gitgitgadget/git>
(`Pull-Request:`), the latest patch series iteration of which this commit was
part (`Iteration:`), etc. If the identical commit has been submitted as part of
(an) earlier patch series iteration(s), the Message-Ids of the corresponding
mails should be also made available, as `Submitted-as-v<iteration>:`.

Likewise, we will add as notes the URLs of the handled PRs, and in the future
also the URLs of handled PR comments.

Global metadata is stored in the Git note for the [empty
blob](https://github.com/git/git/blob/v2.17.0/cache.h#L1026-L1027). This
includes all metadata not corresponding to a particular PR, such as the list
of GitHub accounts permitted to use GitGitGadget.

By virtue of running the Azure Pipeline in a dedicated agent pool with a single
agent, GitGitGadget does not need to worry about concurrency: there is really
only one job that is run at any given time.
